---
layout: post
title: "What is the analemma?"
author: "Ben Lansdell"
categories: posts
published: false
tags: [astronomy, analemma, equation of time]
image: stars.png
---

# The Sun’s analemma

If you were to look at the sky every ${period} of the year at the exact same hour, where would the Sun be? The diagram below shows its position for each hour of the day, limited by the horizon. Each twisted loop (called an  [analemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analemma)), is in fact made of ${days.length} dots, one for each ${period} of the year. The analemma shows by how much solar time is fast or slow compared to clock time, at different periods of the year.

This is a fascinating object that ultimately reveals a lot about the motion of the earth around the sun. Which we'll break down here.

## Observing the analemma

It's also a deceptively simple object, in how it's described. 'Take a photo at the same time each day' and you'll get this shape. But for a lot of human history, time of day was measured in relation to the position of the sun. So the analemma, as much as it would make sense to observe, would not draw this interesting infinity-like shape, but instead just be a single line. 

## Getting philosophical

What can we say about this shape, after understanding the details a bit more?

Time is a foundational part of our lives in modern society, structuring our days and allowing us to plan into the future and document the past accurately. Though it ignores the challenges that Einstein's special (and general) relativity pose to the concept, we have today a 'Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)'<sup>1</sup>" -- a single clock that counts away seconds for the whole earth -- and forms the basis for time zones around the world. We take an idea like this for granted, but it is a relatively new concept. Prior to the needs of train travel, for instance, each town would keep its own time zone, effectively, basing noon on when the sun was directly overhead. The need to coordinate time zones and clocks only came about when we needed to write down accurate train schedules, and of course later plane schedules, global communication, etc. And, before accurate clocks, the time of day used to just be split into 12 hours, no matter how long the actual day was. In winter, hours were shorter than they were in summer. Before modern needs, time was very provincial. 

Indeed, UTC, though useful, highlights this tension between what is experienced provincially and what is needed globally. We live in the solar system, of course, so our experience is affected by the rhythms of the sun and the earth -- day, dusk, night, dawn, winter, spring, summer, autumn. We want a time-keeping system that represents these rhythms. But the motion of the earth around the sun isn't as orderly as we might like for this purpose. Days change their length through-out the year, and the time between successive noons deviates slightly. In today's society, with globally available, near-instantaneous modes of communication, where some of our scheduling is separated from where the sun is in the sky, we also desire a totally regular system, where an hour represents the same duration of time whether it's in winter or summer. The resulting system that we have balances this tension. A mean solar day is 86400 seconds* -- 24 hours. The compromise results in the equation of time, the deviation of local solar time from mean solar time -- manifest in the analemma, and also in the need for leap years. That is, so long as we desire a system in which March means the start of spring, and noon means (roughly) when the sun is overhead then we must make this regular system conform to the actual motion of the earth around the sun. In some sense then, our time keeping system is a convenient approximation to an underlying more complex reality. 

This approximation hides the subtleties of the motion of the sun and the earth. But the analemma shows some of them to us. From its motion up and down we can infer the tilt of the earth's axis from the ecliptic. And from its motion back and forward we can infer the the earth orbit's the sun in an ellipse, not a circle. We can infer some of the properties of this ellipse. It wasn't until Brahe, Kepler and ultimately Newton in the 17th century that this was properly understood. As observations go, then, it is a remarkably simple one that can reveal what are ultimately very . 
 
Viewed this way then, the analemma becomes a representation of the idea that, behind the simplest of observations can lie a hidden world of complexity. A tribute to the power of human inquiry that, just by asking the right questions and thinking through them, can we come to understand more about the world. Things that may be counter intuitive, mathematically challenging, and beautiful. Einstein's theories of relativity are some of the best examples of this. Elegant lines of reasoning, based on a few simple observations and thought experiments, that lead to truly ground-breaking changes in our understanding of the world. The world is so full of wonder and the possibility of discovery, if only we sit, observe and ask the right questions. It is an invigorating and exciting perspective. What else is out there, just under the surface?

1. Actually it's no coincidence that Einstein's name shows up here. He developed his theory of special relativity while a patent clerk reviewing patents for how to synchronize clocks at train stations. His theory is in some sense an intellectual off-shoot of this revising of the use of time in society. However his special theory of relativity says that there is, in fact, no well defined sense of 'simultaneous events' for spatially separated observers. It is perhaps a bit ironic, then, that the ultimate end-point of this need to synchronize clocks around the world would result in a universal coordinated time, somewhat antithetical to Einstein's theory. In practice, of course, the effects of relativity (both special and general) have such a small effect in this case that we can make good use of UTC.
